---
layout: post
title:  "Positivism and the Digital Humanities"
date:   2015-09-27 
categories: digital humanities
---
Recently, a young German historian friend of mine, who had just returned from a conference focused on the vicisitudes of critical thoery in the United States, told me that at the conference there had been some discussion of recent developments in the American universities. In these discussions, a lot of attention was paid to the new vogue of digital humanities. With an arrogance typical of left-wing theorists in Europe, for whom the details of American history are often secondary considerations, the participants decided evidently that this new development repreesnted little more than a predictable resurgence of the scientisitc and positivistic liberal progressivism that is all too famliar to left critics of American social thought.

When I heard these critiques, I understood immediately why the participants at this conference might draw these conclusions about the digital humanities, and yet a I reacted against them. I did not react defensively out of a desire to defend digital humanties as a distinct domain or discipline, but in fact because in fact this assesment of what the digital humanities is or could be seemed too narrow.
It seemed to miss what elsewhere I've described in  a [previous post](/what-is-digital-humanities) as the special quality of digital humanities: namely, that it is best understood at this moment as a socio-cultural and economic process resulting from an encounter between what Boltanski & Chiapello have called the "new spirit of capitalism", with its emphasis on flat hierarchies and the academic domain, whose institutional pattern is still rooted in the model of expertise and hierarchy that characterized mid-century social democratic visions of modern society.Given this broader framing of the significance of the digitial humanties, the characterization of digital humanities as positivistic just made very little sense at all. How could a social process of so much potential complexity resolve itself into a single methodological and philosophical pattern that one might describe simply as "positivistic"? 

All that said, once I got over this initial reaction, I realized (of course) that this question regarding the the methodological and theoretical impact of the emergence of the "digital" in the "humanities" -- that is, the shocking presence of computation in a domain that has for centuries been marked by a valuation of the human mind, of human thought, and of human critique -- is one that can scarcely be avoided. 

Moreover, it is completely unsurprising that the charge of "positivism" would immediately come to the mind of those individuals who identify and associate their value system with these semi-sacred -- or rather, just sacred -- values of human thought and critique. Those who identify with these values of scholarship and human critique have long resisted overwheening enthusiasm for science and technological utopias. Those battles have already been fought, and in fact never ceased to be fought, and from its initial inception by the likes of Auguste Comte and Hebert Spencer, among others, it is has always been positivism, with its belief that all human problems from the functioning of the body to the functioning of human political systems could be understood according to regular lawful principles, that has served as the primary terrain of this conflict. 

So it makes perfect sense indeed that when "the digital" suddenly emerges at the core of those very academic institutions that have provided the only relatively secure base for the humanities -- and when it is under the banner of "the digital" that so much new funding is flowing into the academic system in the United States after the 2008 financial collapse -- that those who seek to defend the value of critique would reach for their holster and pull out that well-worn weapon of humanitic critique and claim that digital humanities is just positivism in another guise. 

Nonetheless, I continue to think that digital humanties deserves more thorough consideration; that it is not just positivism redux. One way to open up a space for this much broader consideration of its impact and significance is simply to understand that its root lies first and foremost in the radical accesssability of computational tools and the rise of compuational and web technologies which have a much lower threshold for usage at the same time as the interest in programming has been mainstreamed. It's no longer nerdy to express an interst in computers and in programming. The result is that where once scholars restricted themselves to the use of the word processor on their personal computer, now many especially young scholars are looking just beyond their wordprocessors and realizing that that they have at their fingertips is also a compuational powerhouse whose capacity to aid them in their research is limited only by their imagination, by the rate at which they can learn to code, and by their ability to make their sources -- whatever they be -- accessible to compuational manipulation. The result of this realization, however, is not that these young scholars are suddenly converted to positivism, and dreaming up techno-scientific informational utopias. Rather, what happens I think, and what will happen more and more, is that those who are experimentation with computation discover that these tools open up a range of new capacities in the context of exisiting methodological, theoretical, and political questions. 